# Alias, require and import

## alias

`alias` allows you to refer to a module under a different name. It's useful when dealing with namespaced module names, like `MyProject.Utils`. The alias directive allows referring to it just as `Utils` within the current scope:

```elixir
defmodule MyProject.Utils do
  def concat(a, b) do
    a <> " " <> b
  end
end

alias MyProject.Utils

Utils.concat("hello", "world")
```

With the `as` option, you can also choose a different alias:

```elixir
alias MyProject.Utils, as: MyUtils

MyUtils.concat("hello", "world")
```

Note that `alias` is lexically scoped, which allows you to set aliases inside specific functions:

```elixir
x = 5

if x >= 4 do
  alias MyProject.Utils, as: U

  U.concat("hello", "world")
else
  # 💡 Try changing the value of `x`, so that it's less than 4, and uncomment the code below.
  # Does the alias work in this scope?

  # U.concat("hello", "world")
end
```

Finally, all module names and aliases are converted to atoms at the compile time:

```elixir
is_atom(Foo.Bar) and Foo.Bar == :"Elixir.Foo.Bar"
```

## require

Elixir provides macros as a mechanism for meta-programming (writing code that generates code). Macros are expanded at compile time.

Public functions in modules are globally available, but in order to use macros, you need to opt-in by requiring the module they are defined in.

In the code below, we use the Logger module. Logger provides macro-based API, so that when you configure it to disable some logs, they can be completely removed from the code at the compile-time. Therefore, `Logger.info/1` is a macro and we have to use `require` before calling it.

```elixir
# 💡 Try removing the line below and see what happens
require Logger

Logger.info("hello")
```

`require` also supports the `as` option, so you can do `require` and `alias` in one line:

```elixir
require Logger, as: L

L.info("hello")
```

Note that `require` generates a _compile-time dependency_ on the required module. It means that the required module must be compiled before the one calling require. Also, if the required module changes, all modules which require it must be checked and may have to be recompiled. Therefore, using `require` too often may significantly increase compilation times.

## import

We use import whenever we want to access functions or macros from other modules without using the fully-qualified name. Note we can only import public functions, as private functions are never accessible externally.

For example, if we want to use the `duplicate/2` function from the `List` module several times, we can import it:

```elixir
import List, only: [duplicate: 2]

duplicate("hello", 3)
```

Note that we imported only the function `duplicate` (with arity 2) from `List`. Although `:only` is optional, its usage is recommended in order to avoid importing all the functions of a given module inside the current scope. `:except` could also be given as an option in order to import everything in a module except a list of functions.

Like `alias`, `import` is lexically scoped too. This means that we can import specific macros or functions inside function definitions:

```elixir
defmodule Foo do
  def bar() do
    import List, only: [duplicate: 2]

    duplicate("hello", 3)
  end
end

Foo.bar()
```

In the example above, the imported `List.duplicate/2` is only visible within that specific function. `duplicate/2` won't be available in any other function in that module (or any other module for that matter).

While imports can be useful for frameworks and libraries to build abstractions, developers should generally prefer `alias` to `import` on their own codebases, as aliases make the origin of the function being invoked clearer.

Also, note that `import` also `require`s given module automatically.


## Multi alias, require and import

Let's say we have multiple modules in the same namespace:

```elixir
defmodule My.Project do
  defmodule Foo do
    def hello do
      "hello"
    end
  end

  defmodule Bar do
    def hi do
      "hi"
    end
  end
end
```

To alias them, we can use the syntax with `{}` brackets:

```elixir
alias My.Project.{Foo, Bar}

Foo.hello() <> " " <> Bar.hi()
```

The same applies to `require` and `import`.

💡 Try changing `alias` to `import` above. Adjust the calls accordingly.
