# if and cond

`case` builds on pattern matching and guards to destructure and match on certain conditions.

However, patterns and guards are limited only to certain expressions which are optimized by the compiler. In many situations, you need to write conditions that go beyond what can be expressed with `case`. For those, `if` is a useful alternative.

`if` accepts an expression, then a `do` block, and optionally an `else` block. If the expression evaluates to a truthy value (anything except `false` and `nil`), then the `do` block is evaluated. Otherwise - the `else` block, if present:

```elixir
# 💡 Try changing true to IO.puts("hello")
if true do
  "This works!"
end
```

Only `false` and `nil` are treated as falsy values - everything else is truthy:

```elixir
# 💡 Try changing false to nil
if false do
  "This will never be seen"
end
```

When the condition is falsy and an `else` block is present, the `else` block is evaluated:

```elixir
if 4 > 5 do
  "This won't be seen"
else
  "This will"
end
```

## Variable scoping

This is a good opportunity to talk about variable scoping in Elixir. If any variable is declared or changed inside `if`, `case`, and similar constructs, the declaration and change will only be visible inside the construct:

<!-- langtour:{"test_replace_code":"x = 1\nif true do\n  x = x + 1\n  x\nend\nx"} -->

```elixir
x = 1
if true do
  x = x + 1
end
x
```

To change a variable, you must return the value from the `if` and reassign it:

```elixir
x = 1
x = if true do
  x + 1
else
  x
end
x
```

## cond

We have used `case` to find a matching clauses from many patterns. We have used `if` to check for a single condition. If you need to check across several conditions and find the first one that evaluates to a truthy value, `cond` is a useful construct.

If you find yourself nesting several `if` blocks, you may want to consider using `cond` instead. `cond` is equivalent to `else if` clauses in many imperative languages - although used less frequently in Elixir.

```elixir
cond do
  2 + 2 == 5 ->
    "This will not be true"
  2 * 2 == 3 ->
    "Nor this"
  1 + 1 == 2 ->
    "But this will"
end
```

If all of the conditions in `cond` return `nil` or `false`, an error (`CondClauseError`) is raised. For this reason, it may be necessary to add a final condition, equal to `true`, which will always match:

```elixir
# 💡 Try removing the last condition (true -> ...). What happens?
cond do
  2 + 2 == 5 ->
    "This is never true"
  2 * 2 == 3 ->
    "Nor this"
  true ->
    "This is always true (equivalent to else)"
end
```

## Summing up

We have concluded the introduction to the most fundamental control-flow constructs in Elixir.

Generally speaking, Elixir developers prefer pattern matching and guards, using `case` and function definitions (which we will explore in future chapters), as they are succinct and precise.

When your logic cannot be outlined within patterns and guards, you may consider `if`, falling back to `cond` when there are several conditions to check.

Before you go further, let's try a little exercise 💡.

> Try rewriting the following code into a single `case` with three clauses.
>
> You'll need to rephrase the conditions into pattern matching.
>
> Then, try changing the values of `nums` and `opt`.

<details>
  <summary>Hint</summary>
  <span>
    To put two values into `case`, make them a tuple.
  </span>
</details>

```elixir
nums = [1, 2, 3]
opt = :a

if opt == :a do
  "fizz"
else
  if hd(nums) == 2 do
    "buzz"
  else
    "bazz"
  end
end
```
