# Keyword Lists

Now let's talk about associative data structures. Associative data structures are able to associate a key to a certain value. Different languages call these different names like dictionaries, hashes, associative arrays, etc.

In Elixir, we have two main associative data structures: keyword lists and maps. Let's start with keyword lists.

## Keyword lists

Keyword lists are regular lists, with additional requirement: each element is a two-element tuple, where the first element is a key and the second is a value. Keys are required to be atoms, and values can be of any type.

For constructing keyword lists, we usually use a syntax sugar: `[key1: value1, key2: value2, ...]`.

A keyword list:

```elixir
[{:a, 1}, {:b, 2}]
```

The same keyword list using syntax sugar:

```elixir
[a: 1, b: 2]
```

Keyword lists can have duplicate keys:

```elixir
[a: 1, b: 2, b: 3]
```

In keyword lists, order matters:

```elixir
[a: 1, b: 2] != [b: 2, a: 1]
```

Now that we understand what keyword lists are, let's explore the operations we can perform on them.

## Keyword list operations

You can operate on keyword lists just like on regular lists.

Additionally, [`Keyword`](https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Keyword.html) module contains functions specific to keyword lists.

Concatenating two keyword lists:

```elixir
[a: 1, b: 2] ++ [c: 3, d: 4]
```

Checking if something is a keyword list:

> Note the trailing ? sign in 'keyword?' - it's just a partof the function name. However, the convention is to use it for functions returning booleans.

```elixir
Keyword.keyword?([a: 1, b: 2])
```

The tuple syntax also works:

```elixir
# 💡 Try changing :a to "a". Is it still a keyword list?
Keyword.keyword?([{:a, 1}, {:b, 2}])
```

Getting a value by key:

```elixir
# 💡 Let's change Keyword.get to Keyword.delete
Keyword.get([a: 1, b: 2], :a)
```

Using bracket syntax to access values:

```elixir
keyword = [a: 1, b: 2]
keyword[:a]
```

Adding a new key-value pair:

```elixir
Keyword.put([a: 1, b: 2], :c, 3)
```

Keyword lists have a special use case in Elixir - passing options to functions.

## Using keyword lists as function options

Keyword lists are commonly used to pass options to functions.

For example, we can use them with `IO.inspect`!

The second argument of `IO.inspect` is actually a keyword list. We only pass the `label` key, but others are possible, such as `pretty`.

It may be not obvious, because there are no square braces - we can omit them when a keyword list is the last argument of a function.

Different ways to write the same `IO.inspect` call:

```elixir
IO.inspect("hello", [{:label, "Print hello"}])

IO.inspect("hello", [label: "Print hello"])
```

Using multiple options:

```elixir
#💡 Try removing the label, try changing order of keys
#💡 Try using 'printable_limit' key to limit printed characters
IO.inspect [{1, 2, 3}, "hello world"],
  label: "Print a list", pretty: true, width: 15
```

`String.split` also accepts a keyword list:

```elixir
String.split("1 2 3 4", " ")
```

```elixir
#💡 Try removing square braces from [parts: 3]
String.split("1 2 3 4", " ", [parts: 3])
```
