# Maps

Apart from keyword lists, Elixir allows storing key-value pairs in maps. A map is created using the `%{}` syntax.

Compared to keyword lists, maps:

- allow any value as a key
- don't allow duplicate keys
- aren't ordered - you shouldn't rely on their internal ordering
- are faster to operate on, especially with big number of keys

An empty map:

```elixir
%{}
```

Map with keys and values of different types:

```elixir
%{1 => "a", :b => 10}
```

In maps, order doesn't matter:

```elixir
%{1 => "a", :b => 10} == %{:b => 10, 1 => "a"}
```

Now let's explore the operations available for working with maps.

## Map module operations

The [`Map`](https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Map.html) module provides a very similar API to the `Keyword` module with convenience functions to add, remove, and update maps keys:

Getting a value from a map:

```elixir
map = %{:a => 1, 2 => :b}

# 💡 Try changing Map.get to Map.delete
Map.get(map, :a)
```

Using bracket syntax:

```elixir
# 💡 Try changing :a to :x
map[:a]
```

Adding a new key-value pair:

```elixir
# 💡 Try changing "c" to 2, which is already in the map. What happens?
Map.put(%{:a => 1, 2 => :b}, "c", 3)
```

Converting a map to a list of tuples:

```elixir
# 💡 Let's change the map, so that Map.to_list returns a keyword list
Map.to_list(%{:a => 1, 2 => :b})
```

Maps are often used with a predefined set of keys, which enables special syntax.

## Maps with predefined keys

In the previous section, we have used maps as a key-value data structure where keys can be added or removed at any time.

However, it is also common to create maps with a predefined set of keys. Their values may be updated, but new keys are never added nor removed.

This is useful when we know the shape of the data we are working with and, if we get a different key, it likely means a mistake was done elsewhere.

In such cases, the keys are most often atoms. Thus, there's a syntax sugar for that: `%{key1: value1, key2: value2}`.

A map representing a user:

```elixir
%{:name => "John", :age => 23}
```

The same user using syntax sugar:

```elixir
%{name: "John", age: 23}
```

When working with maps that have predefined atom keys, Elixir provides convenient dot notation.

## Dot notation for atom keys

When key is an atom, there's dedicated syntax for accessing the map: `map.key` and updating it: `%{map | key: value}`.

When a map has predefined, atom keys, it's best to use this syntax over `Map` module, because it raises when the key is not already there. Thus, if you accidentally use a wrong key, you get feedback early on, sometimes even in the compile time.

This is also the syntax used to power another Elixir feature called "Structs", which we will learn later on.

Accessing a field (what happens if you try to get `user.surname`?):

```elixir
user = %{name: "John", age: 23}

# 💡 What happens if you try to get user's surname, which is not there?
user.name
```

Updating a field:

```elixir
# 💡 Try replacing age with a non-existent key
%{user | age: 24}
```

## Summary

In this chapter we learned about keyword lists and maps. To sum up:

- Use keyword lists for passing optional values to functions
- Use maps for general key-value data structures
- Use maps when working with data that has a predefined set of keys
