# Lists

In this chapter we will learn two of the most used collection data-types in Elixir: lists and tuples. Let's start with lists.

Elixir uses square brackets to specify a list of values. Values can be of any type, so you can mix different types within one list:

```elixir
# 💡 Try nesting another list within the list.
[1, true, 3, "hello"]
```

Getting the length of a list:

```elixir
length([1, 2, 3])
```

## Accessing List Elements

Throughout the tutorial, we will talk a lot about the head and tail of a list. The head is the first element of a list and the tail is the remainder of the list. They can be retrieved with the functions `hd/1` and `tl/1`.

Head of the list:

```elixir
# 💡 Try changing the list to an empty list.
hd([1, 2, 3])
```

Tail of the list:

```elixir
tl([1, 2, 3])
```

## Prepending to list

Lists are stored in memory as linked lists, meaning that each element in a list holds its value and points to the following element until the end of the list is reached. Therefore, prepending to a list is a fast (constant time) operation, while appending requires traversing entire list. That's why prepending an element is a common operation in Elixir and there's a special syntax for it: `[element | list]`

Prepending an element:

```elixir
# 💡 Try expressing it using the `++` operator.
list = [1, 2, 3]
[0 | list]
```

A list constructed only with `[head | tail]` syntax:

```elixir
[0 | [1 | [2 | [3 | []]]]]
```

## List Operations in Elixir

Two lists can be concatenated or subtracted using the `++` and `--` operators respectively.

List operators never modify the existing list. Concatenating to or removing elements from a list returns a new list. We say that Elixir data structures are _immutable_.

One advantage of immutability is that it leads to clearer code. You can freely pass the data around with the guarantee no one will mutate it in memory - only transform it.

Concatenating lists:

```elixir
list ++ [4, 5, 6]
```

```elixir
# 💡 Let's check `list` after concatenating. Did it change?
list
```

Subtracting lists:

```elixir
[1, true, 2, false, 3, true] -- [true, false]
```

## Charlists

When Elixir sees a list of printable ASCII numbers, it will print that as a charlist (a list of characters). That's for better interoperability with Erlang, where strings are represented as charlists instead of binaries.

`~c""` syntax lets you create a charlist similarly to strings.

Charlist with control characters:

```elixir
# 💡 Try appending `0` to the list.
[11, 12, 13]
```

Charlist representing "hello":

```elixir
[104, 101, 108, 108, 111]
```

Using the `~c""` syntax:

```elixir
~c"hello"
```
