# Basic Types and Operations

In this chapter we will learn about Elixir basic types: integers, floats, booleans, atoms, and strings. Let's see some examples.

Here's an integer:

```elixir
42
```

A float (a floating point number):

```elixir
3.14159
```

A boolean value:

```elixir
true
```

An atom (a constant whose name is its value):

```elixir
:elixir
```

And a string:

```elixir
"Hello, Elixir!"
```

We'll learn more about these types in a moment. Now, let's see how we can assign them to variables.

## Variables and Immutability

Similarly to many other languages, you can assign a value to a variable using `=` sign.

```elixir
x = "value"
x
```

Variables must start with a lowercase letter or an underscore. By convention, the variable names are written in `snake_case`. Leading underscore has a special meaning, but we'll learn that (and more details about variables) in the chapter about pattern matching.

You may re-assign the variable name to a different value, even of a different type:

```elixir
y = "foo"
y = 1
y
```

However, all data in Elixir is immutable. It means that under the hood, the `y` from the line 1 and `y` from the line 2 are two different variables - they just share the same name. We'll learn more about consequences of this in further chapters.

Variables can be assigned from other variables:

```elixir
x = "value"
y = x
y
```

Re-assigning a variable doesn't affect other variables that were assigned its previous value:

```elixir
x = "value"
y = x
x = 1
IO.inspect(x)
y
```

## Modules and functions

In Elixir, functions are grouped in modules. To call a function, we use `Module.function(comma, separated, arguments)`. We already called `inspect` function from the `IO` module:

```elixir
IO.inspect("hello")
```

The Elixir standard library contains many modules and functions. For example, `String.duplicate` returns a string repeated given number of times:

```elixir
String.duplicate("hello", 3)
```

Functions from the `Kernel` module can be called just by their name, for example:

```elixir
Kernel.round(1.7)
```

is the same as:

```elixir
round(1.7)
```

In the documentation and guides like this, the convention is to refer to functions using `Module.function/arity` or `function/arity` syntax, where 'arity' is the number of arguments, for example: `IO.inspect/1`, `String.duplicate/2` or `round/1`. You can look up the documentation for each function on [hexdocs.pm](https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Kernel.html).

Now, let's learn more about the basic types and how to use them.
