# Anonymous Functions

Anonymous functions allow us to store and pass executable code around as if it was an integer or a string.

To define an anonymous function, you can use `fn arguments -> body end` syntax, where 'arguments' are comma-separated and 'body' is regular Elixir code.

Such function can be assigned to a variable, passed as an argument to another function, etc.

If an anonymous function is assigned to a variable `f`, we can invoke it with `f.(arguments)`. Notice the dot before the opening bracket - it's to differentiate calling an anonymous function from a regular one.

The reason for that distinction is to avoid ambiguity and reduce mental overhead when reading a code. For example, when you see a call to `is_atom(:foo)`, you can be sure that `Kernel.is_atom` is called, not an anonymous function assigned to `is_atom` variable.

Defining an anonymous function:

```elixir
add = fn a, b -> a + b end
add
```

Calling the function:

```elixir
# 💡 Try removing the dot from the call
add.(2, 3)
```

Checking if something is a function:

```elixir
is_function(add)
```

Checking arity:

```elixir
# 💡 Try changing 2 to a different number
is_function(add, 2)
```

## Returning values

Now that we know how to define and call anonymous functions, let's understand how they return values.

In many languages, there's a `return` keyword, used to return a value from a function.

In Elixir, there's no such keyword - the value returned is just the last value in the function body.

It means that each function returns something. If there's nothing sensible to return, we usually return `:ok`.

The last expression is returned:

```elixir
# 💡 Let's make inspect_and_add return :ok
inspect_and_add = fn a, b ->
  IO.inspect({a, b})
  a + b
end

inspect_and_add.(2, 3)
```

## Closures

Anonymous functions can also access variables that are in scope when the function is defined.

This is typically referred to as closures, as they close over their scope.

Closures capture variables from the defining scope:

```elixir
a = 3

increment_by_a = fn x -> x + a end

# 💡 Try assigning 4 to variable 'a',
# after the function is defined and before it's called
# Does it affect the function?
increment_by_a.(2)
```

## Clauses and guards

Similar to `case/2`, we can pattern match on the arguments of anonymous functions as well as define multiple clauses and guards - see the example.

The number of arguments in each anonymous function clause needs to be the same, otherwise an error is raised.

Multiple clauses with guards:

```elixir
# 💡 Try adding another clause with three arguments: x, y and z
f = fn
  x, y when x > 0 -> x + y
  a, b -> a * b
end

# 💡 Let's change 1 to -1
f.(1, 3)
```

## The capture operator

For creating short, simple functions, we can also use the capture operator `&`.

Then, we can use `&1`, `&2`, `&3` etc to refer to the first, second, third argument etc - see the example.

Using capture operator:

```elixir
# This is equivalent to fn a, b -> a + b end
add = & &1 + &2
add.(2, 3)
```

Capturing function calls:

```elixir
split_by_comma = &String.split(&1, ",")
split_by_comma.("1,2,3")
```

## Capturing regular function

The capture operator has another use: converting a regular function to an anonymous one, for example to pass it as an argument.

Sometimes we may want to convert a regular function to an anonymous one, for example to pass it as an argument.

We could write it as `&function(&1, &2, ...)`, but there's a shorthand for that: `&function/arity`, where 'arity' stands for the number of arguments.

Capturing a function:

```elixir
# 💡 Try also &String.contains?/2
string_split = &String.split/2
string_split
```

Checking the captured function:

```elixir
is_function(string_split)
```

Calling the captured function:

```elixir
string_split.("hello world", " ")
```
