# Processes Basics

In Elixir, all code runs inside processes. Processes are isolated from each other, run concurrent to one another and communicate via message passing. Processes are not only the basis for concurrency in Elixir, but they also provide the means for building distributed and fault-tolerant programs.

Elixir's processes should not be confused with operating system processes. Processes in Elixir are extremely lightweight in terms of memory and CPU (even compared to threads as used in many other programming languages). Because of this, it is not uncommon to have tens or even hundreds of thousands of processes running simultaneously.

In this chapter, we will learn about the basic constructs for spawning new processes, as well as sending and receiving messages between processes.

## Spawning processes

The basic mechanism for spawning new processes is the auto-imported `spawn` function.

`spawn` takes a function which it will execute in another process, and returns a PID (process identifier), that can be used to interact and communicate with the process.

After executing the function, the process exits immediately. We can check whether a process is alive with `Process.alive?` function.

Spawning a process returns a PID:

```elixir
pid = spawn(fn -> 1 + 2 end)
pid
```

Checking if a process is alive:

```elixir
# 💡 Try replacing the function passed to spawn with
pid = spawn(fn -> 1 + 2 end)
Process.alive?(pid)
```

## Self

All Elixir code runs in processes.

The code evaluator we use to run examples also spawns a process. We can tell that by calling `self`, which returns the PID of the current process.

Getting the current process PID:

```elixir
pid = self()
pid
```

Checking if the current process is alive:

```elixir
pid = self()
Process.alive?(pid)
```

Each spawned process has its own PID:

```elixir
# 💡 Let's run this code a few times. How do the PIDs change?
spawn(fn ->
  IO.inspect self(), label: "This code runs in another process"
end)
self()
```
